
Basic Statistics 
	Each biota has some basic numbers that track its current conditions.

1. Base Points: This is the number of points that are necessary to sustain the Biota.  This is the summation of things like the number of limbs, the 
presence of a shell, the number of eyes, and other traits.  The base point value is converted to latent nutrients upon the death of the individual.
Likewise, the base points puts constraints on how complex an individual can get from one generation to the next, and how many reserve points must be 
accommulated in order to reproduce.

****LATER***	Base points are further broken down into Pre-Biotic Compounds, Poly-Organo-Goo, Carbon, and Proteins.  These percentages are determined by the encoding 
string for the haplogroup strain.

2. Subsistance Points: This is the number of nutrient points that the individual must acquire each turn to continue to live.  These points can be 
drawn from 3 different sources: A) Environment, B) Community, C) or Reserves.  For more on these sources refer to the section on feeding.

3. Reserve Points: This is the number of points that the biota must collect beyond basic subsistance in order to reproduce, survive famine, heal, etc.  
This is, in many ways, a basic indicator of health of the individual.


Stage: Attack/Defense

Some Biota may attack others, and some biota may have defenses against those attacks.  Attacks can be simply for the purposes of removing competing 
haplogroup members, or for the purposes of hunting/feeding.  If the Biota is incapable of attacking, it can be ignored in this stage.

	Evaluate the surrounding cells in the order of preference (a sequence of 6 or 17 characters representing which adjacent cells will be considered 
	for attacks.
	- If the biota attacked a cell last tick, it will continue to do so this cycle.  
	- If the considered cell is occupied by a member of the biota's own haplogroup, then skip this cell and immediately consider the next available cell
	- If the considered cell is empty, skip this cell and immediately consider the next available cell
	- If the considered cell is occupied by a member of a competing haplogroup, the biota will likely attack (need an attribute for likelihood)
		- If the biota attacks, it may or may not be successful.  The success depends on the type of attack and any applicable defense for the
		victim.  For simplicity we will consider only a few dimensions.
			- Attacks can be of the following type (dependent on limb type for attacker):
				Blunt: General feet and arms can deliver this type of attack and all exteriors are vulnerable to this type of attack.  
					Attack damage will be random within a range (attribute needed).  This damage will be subtracted from the 
					exterior strength of the victim (shells, fur, skin, etc., have different strengths).  
				Stab: Only specific limb types can stab.  Stabs are ineffective against some exterior types (shells) and less effective 
					against others (fur).  Again, attack damage is done to the victim.

	A biota under attack may deploy defenses as follows
	- If the biota has limbs, the limb closest to the attack may perform a defensive action, unless that limb has already attacked or already defended or 1/2 of 
		the limbs of the defender have already attacked or defended.
	- Defensive actions include the following:
		- Blocking: This is dependent on a limb on the appropriate side of the biota and the biota having sight.  A successful block negates 90% of the damage
		- Grab: This is dependent on a limb of the appropriate type on the appropriate side of the biota.  A successful grab reduces damage by 50% and inflicts
			10% of the attack damage on the attacker.  This also prevents the attacker from subsequent attacks while the attacking limb is held, while the 
			attackers also continues to take damage each turn.
		- Sever: This is dependent on a limb of the appropriate type on the appropriate side of the biota.  A successful sever accepts full damage from the attack,
			but inflicts the same amount on the attacker and amputates the limb of the attacker (delaying or elminating any further attacks)

	Additional Passive Defensive capabilities include:
	- Spike: Damage is inflicted on the attacker, even for some unsuccessful attacks
	- Infect: 10% damage is inflicted on the attacker for the next 1-10 turns due to an acquired infection.

	Any biota that dies seeds the now "empty" cell with nutrients.  The points worth of nutrients will be equal to the reserves plus the base number of the biota.
				

Stage: Feed

All Biota will need to consume resources, even at a minimal "maintenance" level when they have no place to grow into, 
so this will apply to all Biota each round.

	Evaluate the home cell - 
	1.	A universal unit of nutrient is provided to the Biota for each adjacent cell that is occupied by a living member of the same haplogroup.
                This is akin to an algea mat or fungal growth wherein the units combine into a community that works to sustain the whole as much as 
		the individuals.  This makes the continguous growth of the haplogroup an advantageous thing, as it provides internal support to each of
		the members of the cluster
	2.	All cells in the feeding radii of the biota are candidates for gathering nutrients.  Any available compatible nutrient units are consumed 
		from the reach-able cells in the an order of precedence: dictated by their feeding sequence attribute, which is defined as a string of digits
		from 0 to 6 in any order.  By default, the initial Biota will use a sequence with only 1 digit of 0 (see diagram).  Each subsequent 
		generation may randomly mutate this order of consumption, but it will always be a string of digits that is as long as needed as defined 
		by the feeding radii of the biota (dictated by limbs and other attributes).  Initially, since the first generation biota will always 
		begin with a radii of 0, the string is only 1 digit long, representative of the home cell.  With a feeding reach/radii of 1, the string
		must be 7 digits long; 1 digit for the home cell, and 6 digits for the surrounding cells.  At a reach of 2, the string will therefore 
		be 18 characters long.  There are no plans to support a reach of more than 2, and even a 2 should be rare.
		- There is no restriction on duplicate digits.  A feeding sequence can repeat as many of the digits as possible...even to the point
		that it could all be one digit: 000000
		- The mutations could result in a preference within a community for feeding in one direction...we'll see.
		- Only 1 cell per term per limb may be fed from
		- Biota may have, 0, 3, or 6 limbs.  Those limbs may or may not be feeding aparatus.  Those that are classified as feeding members can
		be thought of as Labellum (sponging) or Stylet (piercing/predatory).  Other limb types may be legs (for motion or defense/pushing) 
		or arms (defense/pushing, offense/pulling)


Stage: Reproduction

All Biota will be evaluated to see if they can reproduce this round.  In order to reproduce, they need the following conditions to be met:
1. They must have enough reserve points in order to undergo mitosis (asexual reproduction/cell division)
2. They must have 1 adjacent cell that is vacant where their offspring can be placed
3. They must have not reproduced in the last X ticks/turns as this minimum number of ticks must have elapsed before a cell division can occur again
4. They must not be currently infected

If these conditions are met, the offspring will be placed in an available adjacent cell according to preference sequence of the surrounding cells.

Each new offspring has a small change of expressing a mutation.  Multiple mutations could occur but the chances should be small for the original mutation, and therefore any additional mutations
in the same individual would be even more unlikely.

 

			
